8 add quarto basics (#23)
numbats/monash-learnr-modules: modules/quarto-basics/index.qmd

title-block-banner: yes
engine: knitr
filters:
  - webr-teachr
webr:
  packages: 
css: style.css
format:
  html:
    toc: true
---

::: {.alert .alert-block .alert-warning}
# What is Quarto?
Quarto is a **free, open-source** system that helps you create **interactive** and **reproducible** documents easily.
:::

::: {.callout-note collapse="true"}
# A Brief History Of Literate Programming
**Literate programming** combines code and documentation in a single, readable document. Before delving into the basics of `Quarto`, it may be worthwhile to know the *brief* history of its predecessors.

## Sweave

Sweave was one of the first tools for literate programming in R, allowing users to embed R code in LaTeX documents, combining R's statistical power with LaTeX's typesetting.

## R Markdown

R Markdown is a modern alternative to Sweave, enabling the integration of text and R code in various output formats like HTML, PDF, and Word, not just LaTeX.

## Quarto
Which leads us to Quarto, a new system that enhances the R Markdown ecosystem. Quarto provides a seamless framework for integrating code, text, and visualisations into a single, interactive, and reproducible document.

> :::

Reviewer: Nice improvements from when we last discussed this :sparkles:

# Quarto Fundamentals

![](images/quarto_fundamentals.png){width="500" fig-align="center"}

Quarto provides a seamless framework for integrating code, text, and visualisations into a single, interactive, and reproducible document. Written in `Markdown`, Quarto is easy to learn yet powerful enough for complex document creation. 

::: callout-tip
## Quarto: Multi-Language and Multi-Engine

Quarto is not only limited to R code chunks, and you can also use **Python, Julia, and SQL code chunks** in your Quarto documents.

R Markdown on the other hand is tied to R, and has a dependency and requirement for R.
:::

Quarto also provides a range of [**built-in templates**](https://quarto.org/docs/websites/website-about.html) that you can use to create documents for different purposes, such as **academic papers, presentations, and websites.** These templates make it easy to get started with Quarto and create professional-looking documents with minimal effort.

## Setting Up Quarto

> To get started with Quarto, you will need to **install Quarto**. You can do this by [here](https://quarto.org/docs/get-started/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get started with Quarto, you will need to **install Quarto**. You can do find the quick start guide [here](https://quarto.org/docs/get-started/).
```

These are only a couple examples of options for chunk options, and there are many more available. You can find a full list of chunk options in [section 28.5.2](https://r4ds.hadley.nz/quarto) as well as further discussion in Communicating with Quarto. 

::: callout-tip
## Global Options
To set global options for all code chunks, add them in the YAML header under `execute:`. Indent the options you want to apply by pressing tab on the next line.
:::

# Markdown text

In a Quarto document, you can write text using Markdown syntax. Markdown is a lightweight markup language that allows you to format text using simple and intuitive syntax. You can use Markdown to create headings, lists, links, images, and more.

## Headings

Headings are created using the `#` symbol followed by the heading text. The number of `#` symbols indicates the level of the heading. For example, `#` creates a first-level heading, `##` creates a second-level heading, and so on.

## Text Formatting
Just like in any other word processors, you can also format your text. Here are some examples:

- **Bold**: `**bold**` or `__bold__`
- *Italic*: `*italic*` or `_italic_`
- ~~Strikethrough~~: `~~strikethrough~~`

> - `Code`: `` `code` ``

Reviewer: Nice display of `code <-> output` :1st_place_medal:

## Lists

Lists can be created using `*`. You can also create nested lists by indenting the items with spaces.

::: callout-tip
## Checklist
You can also create checklists in Quarto! This can be done by using `- [ ]` for an empty box and `- [x]` for a checked box.
:::

# Rendering Your Document

Once you have written your document, you can render it to see the output. To render your document you can:

1. click the `Render` button in the toolbar
2. use the keyboard shortcut `Ctrl + Shift + K` (Windows) or `Cmd + Shift + K` (Mac)
3. run the `quarto::render()` function in the console

![](images/console_render.png){width="700" fig-align="center"}

4. In the Terminal via `quarto render`:

![](images/terminal_render.png){width="700" fig-align="center"}

When you render your document, Quarto will execute the code chunks and generate the output. The output will be displayed in the Viewer pane in RStudio, and you can also view the output in a web browser by clicking cog icon next to `Render` and ticking the `Preview in window` box.

## Test your knowledge

> ** potentially a multiple choice question here about different common chunk options and what they do ??**

Reviewer: Great suggestion - I'll add some of these.

> ** interactive component to edit a basic yaml / include things in yaml -- pain point: warnings, messages = false, toc **

Reviewer: This could be tricky, I'll see what can be done.
It probably needs to be separate from webr for this, or at least with an webr option that prevents execution of code?
